But it's precisely such politics that has stopped either party from
helping the American people. Worse yet, it's sowing further division
among our citizens, further distrust in our Government. So no, I will
not give up on trying to change the tone of our politics. I know it's
an election year. And after last week, it's clear that campaign fever
has come even earlier than usual. But we still need to govern.

To Democrats, I would remind you that we still have the largest
majority in decades and the people expect us to solve problems, not run
for the hills. And if the Republican leadership is going to insist that
60 votes in the Senate are required to do any business at all in this
town--a supermajority--then the responsibility to govern is now yours
as well. Just saying no to everything may be good short-term politics,
but it's not leadership. We were sent here to serve our citizens, not
our ambitions. So let's show the American people that we can do it
together.

This week, I'll be addressing a meeting of the House Republicans. I'd
like to begin monthly meetings with both Democratic and Republican
leadership. I know you can't wait. [Laughter]

Now, throughout our history, no issue has united this country more than
our security. Sadly, some of the unity we felt after 9/11 has
dissipated. And we can argue all we want about who's to blame for this,
but I'm not interested in relitigating the past. I know that all of us
love this country. All of us are committed to its defense. So let's put
aside the schoolyard taunts about who's tough. Let's reject the false
choice between protecting our people and upholding our values. Let's
leave behind the fear and division and do what it takes to defend our
Nation and forge a more hopeful future for America and for the world.

That's the work we began last year. Since the day I took office, we've
renewed our focus on the terrorists who threaten our Nation. We've made
substantial investments in our homeland security and disrupted plots
that threatened to take American lives. We are filling unacceptable
gaps revealed by the failed Christmas attack, with better airline
security and swifter action on our intelligence. We've prohibited
torture and strengthened partnerships from the Pacific to South Asia to
the Arabian Peninsula. And in the last year, hundreds of Al Qaida's
fighters and affiliates, including many senior leaders, have been
captured or killed, far more than in 2008.

And in Afghanistan, we're increasing our troops and training Afghan
security forces so they can begin to take the lead in July of 2011 and
our troops can begin to come home. We will reward good governance, work
to reduce corruption, and support the rights of all Afghans, men and
women alike. We're joined by allies and partners who have increased
their own commitments and who will come together tomorrow in London to
reaffirm our common purpose. There will be difficult days ahead, but I
am absolutely confident we will succeed.

As we take the fight to Al Qaida, we are responsibly leaving Iraq to
its people. As a candidate, I promised that I would end this war, and
that is what I am doing as President. We will have all of our combat
troops out of Iraq by the end of this August. We will support the Iraqi
Government as they hold elections, and we will continue to partner with
the Iraqi people to promote regional peace and prosperity. But make no
mistake: This war is ending, and all of our troops are coming home.

Tonight all of our men and women in uniform, in Iraq, in Afghanistan,
and around the world, they have to know that we--that they have our
respect, our gratitude, our full support. And just as they must have
the resources they need in war, we all have a responsibility to support
them when they come home. That's why we made the largest increase in
investments for veterans in decades last year. That's why we're
building a 21st-century VA. And that's why Michelle has joined with
Jill Biden to forge a national commitment to support military families.

Now, even as we prosecute two wars, we're also confronting perhaps the
greatest danger to the American people, the threat of nuclear weapons.
I've embraced the vision of John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan through a
strategy that reverses the spread of these weapons and seeks a world
without them. To reduce our stockpiles and launchers, while ensuring
our deterrent, the United States and Russia are completing negotiations
on the farthest reaching arms control treaty in nearly two decades. And
at April's Nuclear Security Summit, we will bring 44 nations together
here in Washington, DC, behind a clear goal: securing all vulnerable
nuclear materials around the world in 4 years so that they never fall
into the hands of terrorists.

Now, these diplomatic efforts have also strengthened our hand in
dealing with those nations that insist on violating international
agreements in pursuit of nuclear weapons. That's why North Korea now
faces increased isolation and stronger sanctions, sanctions that are
being vigorously enforced. That's why the international community is
more united and the Islamic Republic of Iran is more isolated. And as
Iran's leaders continue to ignore their obligations, there should be no
doubt: They too will face growing consequences. That is a promise.

That's the leadership we are providing: engagement that advances the
common security and prosperity of all people. We're working through the
G-20 to sustain a lasting global recovery. We're working with Muslim
communities around the world to promote science and education and
innovation. We have gone from a bystander to a leader in the fight
against climate change. We're helping developing countries to feed
themselves and continuing the fight against HIV/AIDS. And we are
launching a new initiative that will give us the capacity to respond
faster and more effectively to bioterrorism or an infectious disease, a
plan that will counter threats at home and strengthen public health
abroad.

As we have for over 60 years, America takes these actions because our
destiny is connected to those beyond our shores. But we also do it
because it is right. That's why, as we meet here tonight, over 10,000
Americans are working with many nations to help the people of Haiti
recover and rebuild. That's why we stand with the girl who yearns to go
to school in Afghanistan, why we support the human rights of the women
marching through the streets of Iran, why we advocate for the young man
denied a job by corruption in Guinea. For America must always stand on
the side of freedom and human dignity--always.

Abroad, America's greatest source of strength has always been our
ideals. The same is true at home. We find unity in our incredible
diversity, drawing on the promise enshrined in our Constitution: The
notion that we're all created equal; that no matter who you are or what
you look like, if you abide by the law, you should be protected by it;
if you adhere to our common values, you should be treated no different
than anyone else.

We must continually renew this promise. My administration has a
Division that is once again prosecuting violations and employment
discrimination. We finally strengthened our laws to protect against
crimes driven by hate. This year, I will work with Congress and our
military to finally repeal the law that denies gay Americans the right
to serve the country they love because of who they are. It's the right
thing to do.

We're going to crack down on violations of equal pay laws so that women
get equal pay for an equal day's work. And we should continue the work
of fixing our broken immigration system, to secure our borders and
enforce our laws and ensure that everyone who plays by the rules can
contribute to our economy and enrich our Nation.

In the end, it's our ideals, our values that built America, values that
allowed us to forge a nation made up of immigrants from every corner of
the globe, values that drive our citizens still. Every day, Americans
meet their responsibilities to their families and their employers. Time
and again, they lend a hand to their neighbors and give back to their
country. They take pride in their labor and are generous in spirit.
These aren't Republican values or Democratic values that they're living
by, business values or labor values, they're American values.

Unfortunately, too many of our citizens have lost faith that our
biggest institutions--our corporations, our media, and, yes, our
Government--still reflect these same values. Each of these institutions
are full of honorable men and women doing important work that helps our
country prosper. But each time a CEO rewards himself for failure or a
banker puts the rest of us at risk for his own selfish gain, people's
doubts grow. Each time lobbyists game the system or politicians tear
each other down instead of lifting this country up, we lose faith. The
more that TV pundits reduce serious debates to silly arguments, big
issues into sound bites, our citizens turn away. No wonder there's so
much cynicism out there. No wonder there's so much disappointment.

I campaigned on the promise of change. Change we can believe in, the
slogan went. And right now I know there are many Americans who aren't
sure if they still believe we can change or that I can deliver it.

But remember this: I never suggested that change would be easy or that
I could do it alone. Democracy in a nation of 300 million people can be
noisy and messy and complicated. And when you try to do big things and
make big changes, it stirs passions and controversy. That's just how it
is.

Those of us in public office can respond to this reality by playing it
safe and avoid telling hard truths and pointing fingers. We can do
what's necessary to keep our poll numbers high and get through the next
election, instead of doing what's best for the next generation.

But I also know this: If people had made that decision 50 years ago or
100 years ago or 200 years ago, we wouldn't be here tonight. The only
reason we are here is because generations of Americans were unafraid to
do what was hard, to do what was needed even when success was uncertain,
to do what it took to keep the dream of this Nation alive for their
children and their grandchildren.

Now, our administration has had some political setbacks this year, and
some of them were deserved. But I wake up every day knowing that they
are nothing compared to the setbacks that families all across this
country have faced this year. And what keeps me going, what keeps me
fighting, is that despite all these setbacks, that spirit of
determination and optimism, that fundamental decency that has always
been at the core of the American people, that lives on.

It lives on in the struggling small-business owner who wrote to me of
his company, "None of us," he said, ". . . are willing to consider,
even slightly, that we might fail." It lives on in the woman who said
that even though she and her neighbors have felt the pain of recession,
"We are strong. We are resilient. We are American." It lives on in the
8-year-old boy in Louisiana who just sent me his allowance and asked if
I would give it to the people of Haiti. And it lives on in all the
Americans who've dropped everything to go someplace they've never been
and pull people they've never known from the rubble, prompting chants
of "U.S.A.! U.S.A.! U.S.A.!" when another life was saved.

The spirit that has sustained this Nation for more than two centuries
lives on in you, its people. We have finished a difficult year. We have
come through a difficult decade. But a new year has come. A new decade
stretches before us. We don't quit. I don't quit. Let's seize this
moment to start anew, to carry the dream forward, and to strengthen our
Union once more.

Thank you. God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.


***


Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
Barack Obama
January 25, 2011


Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, distinguished
guests, and fellow Americans: Tonight I want to begin by congratulating
the men and women of the 112th Congress, as well as your new Speaker,
John Boehner. And as we mark this occasion, we're also mindful of the
empty chair in this Chamber, and we pray for the health of our
colleague and our friend Gabby Giffords.

It's no secret that those of us here tonight have had our differences
over the last 2 years. The debates have been contentious; we have
fought fiercely for our beliefs. And that's a good thing. That's what a
robust democracy demands. That's what helps set us apart as a nation.

But there's a reason the tragedy in Tucson gave us pause. Amid all the
noise and passion and rancor of our public debate, Tucson reminded us
that no matter who we are or where we come from, each of us is a part
of something greater, something more consequential than party or
political preference.

We are part of the American family. We believe that in a country where
every race and faith and point of view can be found, we are still bound
together as one people, that we share common hopes and a common creed,
that the dreams of a little girl in Tucson are not so different than
those of our own children, that they all deserve the chance to be
fulfilled. That too is what sets us apart as a nation.

Now, by itself, this simple recognition won't usher in a new era of
cooperation. What comes of this moment is up to us. What comes of this
moment will be determined not by whether we can sit together tonight,
but whether we can work together tomorrow.

I believe we can, and I believe we must. That's what the people who
sent us here expect of us. With their votes, they've determined that
governing will now be a shared responsibility between parties. New laws
will only pass with support from Democrats and Republicans. We will
move forward together or not at all, for the challenges we face are
bigger than party and bigger than politics.

At stake right now is not who wins the next election. After all, we
just had an election. At stake is whether new jobs and industries take
root in this country or somewhere else. It's whether the hard work and
industry of our people is rewarded. It's whether we sustain the
leadership that has made America not just a place on a map, but the
light to the world.

We are poised for progress. Two years after the worst recession most of
us have ever known, the stock market has come roaring back, corporate
profits are up, the economy is growing again.

But we have never measured progress by these yardsticks alone. We
measure progress by the success of our people, by the jobs they can
find and the quality of life those jobs offer, by the prospects of a
small-business owner who dreams of turning a good idea into a thriving
enterprise, by the opportunities for a better life that we pass on to
our children.

That's the project the American people want us to work on--together.

Now, we did that in December. Thanks to the tax cuts we passed,
Americans' paychecks are a little bigger today. Every business can
write off the full cost of new investments that they make this year.
And these steps, taken by Democrats and Republicans, will grow the
economy and add to the more than 1 million private sector jobs created
last year.

But we have to do more. These steps we've taken over the last 2 years
may have broken the back of this recession, but to win the future,
we'll need to take on challenges that have been decades in the making.

Many people watching tonight can probably remember a time when finding
a good job meant showing up at a nearby factory or a business downtown.
You didn't always need a degree, and your competition was pretty much
limited to your neighbors. If you worked hard, chances are you'd have a
job for life, with a decent paycheck and good benefits and the
occasional promotion. Maybe you'd even have the pride of seeing your
kids work at the same company.

That world has changed. And for many, the change has been painful. I've
seen it in the shuttered windows of once booming factories and the
vacant storefronts on once busy Main Streets. I've heard it in the
frustrations of Americans who've seen their paychecks dwindle or their
jobs disappear, proud men and women who feel like the rules have been
changed in the middle of the game.

They're right. The rules have changed. In a single generation,
revolutions in technology have transformed the way we live, work, and
do business. Steel mills that once needed 1,000 workers can now do the
same work with 100. Today, just about any company can set up shop, hire
workers, and sell their products wherever there's an Internet
connection.

Meanwhile, nations like China and India realized that with some changes
of their own, they could compete in this new world. And so they started
educating their children earlier and longer, with greater emphasis on
math and science. They're investing in research and new technologies.
Just recently, China became the home to the world's largest private
solar research facility and the world's fastest computer.

So yes, the world is changed. The competition for jobs is real. But
this shouldn't discourage us. It should challenge us. Remember, for all
the hits we've taken these last few years, for all the naysayers
predicting our decline, America still has the largest, most prosperous
economy in the world. No workers are more productive than ours. No
country has more successful companies or grants more patents to
inventors and entrepreneurs. We're the home to the world's best
colleges and universities, where more students come to study than any
place on Earth.

What's more, we are the first nation to be founded for the sake of an
idea: the idea that each of us deserves the chance to shape our own
destiny. That's why centuries of pioneers and immigrants have risked
everything to come here. It's why our students don't just memorize
equations, but answer questions like: "What do you think of that idea?
What would you change about the world? What do you want to be when you
grow up?"

The future is ours to win. But to get there, we can't just stand still.
As Robert Kennedy told us: "The future is not a gift. It is an
achievement." Sustaining the American Dream has never been about
standing pat. It has required each generation to sacrifice and struggle
and meet the demands of a new age.

And now it's our turn. We know what it takes to compete for the jobs
and industries of our time. We need to outinnovate, outeducate, and
outbuild the rest of the world. We have to make America the best place
on Earth to do business. We need to take responsibility for our deficit
and reform our Government. That's how our people will prosper. That's
how we'll win the future. And tonight I'd like to talk about how we get
there.

The first step in winning the future is encouraging American innovation.
None of us can predict with certainty what the next big industry will
be or where the new jobs will come from. Thirty years ago, we couldn't
know that something called the Internet would lead to an economic
revolution. What we can do--what America does better than anyone else--
is spark the creativity and imagination of our people. We're the nation
that put cars in driveways and computers in offices; the nation of
Edison and the Wright brothers, of Google and Facebook. In America,
innovation doesn't just change our lives. It is how we make our living.

Our free enterprise system is what drives innovation. But because it's
not always profitable for companies to invest in basic research,
throughout our history, our Government has provided cutting-edge
scientists and inventors with the support that they need. That's what
planted the seeds for the Internet. That's what helped make possible
things like computer chips and GPS. Just think of all the good jobs--
from manufacturing to retail--that have come from these breakthroughs.

Half a century ago, when the Soviets beat us into space with the launch
of a satellite called Sputnik, we had no idea how we would beat them to
the Moon. The science wasn't even there yet. NASA didn't exist. But
after investing in better research and education, we didn't just
surpass the Soviets, we unleashed a wave of innovation that created new
industries and millions of new jobs.

This is our generation's Sputnik moment. Two years ago, I said that we
needed to reach a level of research and development we haven't seen
since the height of the space race. And in a few weeks, I will be
sending a budget to Congress that helps us meet that goal. We'll invest
in biomedical research, information technology, and especially clean
energy technology, an investment that will strengthen our security,
protect our planet, and create countless new jobs for our people.

Already, we're seeing the promise of renewable energy. Robert and Gary
Allen are brothers who run a small Michigan roofing company. After
September 11, they volunteered their best roofers to help repair the
Pentagon. But half of their factory went unused, and the recession hit
them hard. Today, with the help of a Government loan, that empty space
is being used to manufacture solar shingles that are being sold all
across the country. In Robert's words, "We reinvented ourselves."

That's what Americans have done for over 200 years: reinvented
ourselves. And to spur on more success stories like the Allen Brothers,
we've begun to reinvent our energy policy. We're not just handing out
money. We're issuing a challenge. We're telling America's scientists
and engineers that if they assemble teams of the best minds in their
fields and focus on the hardest problems in clean energy, we'll fund
the Apollo projects of our time.

At the California Institute of Technology, they're developing a way to
turn sunlight and water into fuel for our cars. At Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, they're using supercomputers to get a lot more power out of
our nuclear facilities. With more research and incentives, we can break
our dependence on oil with biofuels and become the first country to
have a million electric vehicles on the road by 2015.

We need to get behind this innovation. And to help pay for it, I'm
asking Congress to eliminate the billions in taxpayer dollars we
currently give to oil companies. I don't know if you've noticed, but
they're doing just fine on their own. [Laughter] So instead of
subsidizing yesterday's energy, let's invest in tomorrow's.

Now, clean energy breakthroughs will only translate into clean energy
jobs if businesses know there will be a market for what they're selling.
So tonight I challenge you to join me in setting a new goal: By 2035,
80 percent of America's electricity will come from clean energy sources.

Some folks want wind and solar. Others want nuclear, clean coal, and
natural gas. To meet this goal, we will need them all, and I urge
Democrats and Republicans to work together to make it happen.

Maintaining our leadership in research and technology is crucial to
America's success. But if we want to win the future, if we want
innovation to produce jobs in America and not overseas, then we also
have to win the race to educate our kids.

Think about it. Over the next 10 years, nearly half of all new jobs
will require education that goes beyond a high school education. And
yet as many as a quarter of our students aren't even finishing high
school. The quality of our math and science education lags behind many
other nations. America has fallen to ninth in the proportion of young
people with a college degree. And so the question is whether all of us,
as citizens and as parents, are willing to do what's necessary to give
every child a chance to succeed.

That responsibility begins not in our classrooms, but in our homes and
communities. It's family that first instills the love of learning in a
child. Only parents can make sure the TV is turned off and homework
gets done. We need to teach our kids that it's not just the winner of
the Super Bowl who deserves to be celebrated, but the winner of the
science fair. We need to teach them that success is not a function of
fame or PR, but of hard work and discipline.

Our schools share this responsibility. When a child walks into a
classroom, it should be a place of high expectations and high
performance. But too many schools don't meet this test. That's why
instead of just pouring money into a system that's not working, we
launched a competition called Race to the Top. To all 50 States, we
said, "If you show us the most innovative plans to improve teacher
quality and student achievement, we'll show you the money."

Race to the Top is the most meaningful reform of our public schools in
a generation. For less than 1 percent of what we spend on education
each year, it has led over 40 States to raise their standards for
teaching and learning. And these standards were developed, by the way,
not by Washington, but by Republican and Democratic Governors
throughout the country. And Race to the Top should be the approach we
follow this year as we replace No Child Left Behind with a law that's
more flexible and focused on what's best for our kids.

You see, we know what's possible from our children when reform isn't
just a top-down mandate, but the work of local teachers and principals,
school boards and communities. Take a school like Bruce Randolph in
Denver. Three years ago, it was rated one of the worst schools in
Colorado, located on turf between two rival gangs. But last May, 97
percent of the seniors received their diploma. Most will be the first
in their families to go to college. And after the first year of the
school's transformation, the principal who made it possible wiped away
tears when a student said, "Thank you, Ms. Waters, for showing that we
are smart and we can make it." That's what good schools can do, and we
want good schools all across the country.

Let's also remember that after parents, the biggest impact on a child's
success comes from the man or woman at the front of the classroom. In
South Korea, teachers are known as nation builders. Here in America,
it's time we treated the people who educate our children with the same
level of respect. We want to reward good teachers and stop making
excuses for bad ones. And over the next 10 years, with so many baby
boomers retiring from our classrooms, we want to prepare 100,000 new
teachers in the fields of science and technology and engineering and
math.

In fact, to every young person listening tonight who's contemplating
their career choice: If you want to make a difference in the life of
our Nation, if you want to make a difference in the life of a child,
become a teacher. Your country needs you.

Of course, the education race doesn't end with a high school diploma.
To compete, higher education must be within the reach of every American.
That's why we've ended the unwarranted taxpayer subsidies that went to
banks and used the savings to make college affordable for millions of
students. And this year, I ask Congress to go further and make
permanent our tuition tax credit, worth $10,000 for 4 years of college.
It's the right thing to do.

Because people need to be able to train for new jobs and careers in
today's fast-changing economy, we're also revitalizing America's
community colleges. Last month, I saw the promise of these schools at
Forsyth Tech in North Carolina. Many of the students there used to work
in the surrounding factories that have since left town. One mother of
two, a woman named Kathy Proctor, had worked in the furniture industry
since she was 18 years old. And she told me she's earning her degree in
biotechnology now, at 55 years old, not just because the furniture jobs
are gone, but because she wants to inspire her children to pursue their
dreams too. As Kathy said, "I hope it tells them to never give up."

If we take these steps, if we raise expectations for every child and
give them the best possible chance at an education, from the day they
