already encouraged employers to hire or train nearly 400,000 veterans
and military spouses.

Taking a page from that playbook, the White House just organized a
College Opportunity Summit, where already, 150 universities, businesses,
nonprofits have made concrete commitments to reduce inequality in
access to higher education and to help every hard-working kid go to
college and succeed when they get to campus. And across the country,
we're partnering with mayors, Governors, and State legislatures on
issues from homelessness to marriage equality.

The point is, there are millions of Americans outside of Washington who
are tired of stale political arguments and are moving this country
forward. They believe--and I believe--that here in America, our success
should depend not on accident of birth, but the strength of our work
ethic and the scope of our dreams. That's what drew our forebears here.
That's how the daughter of a factory worker is CEO of America's largest
automaker; how the son of a barkeep is Speaker of the House; how the
son of a single mom can be President of the greatest nation on Earth.

Opportunity is who we are. And the defining project of our generation
must be to restore that promise. We know where to start: The best
measure of opportunity is access to a good job. With the economy
picking up speed, companies say they intend to hire more people this
year. And over half of big manufacturers say they're thinking of
insourcing jobs from abroad.

So let's make that decision easier for more companies. Both Democrats
and Republicans have argued that our Tax Code is riddled with wasteful,
complicated loopholes that punish businesses investing here and reward
companies that keep profits abroad. Let's flip that equation. Let's
work together to close those loopholes, end those incentives to ship
jobs overseas, and lower tax rates for businesses that create jobs
right here at home.

Moreover, we can take the money we save from this transition to tax
reform to create jobs rebuilding our roads, upgrading our ports,
unclogging our commutes, because in today's global economy, first-class
jobs gravitate to first-class infrastructure. We'll need Congress to
protect more than 3 million jobs by finishing transportation and
waterways bills this summer. That can happen. But I'll act on my own to
slash bureaucracy and streamline the permitting process for key
projects so we can get more construction workers on the job as fast as
possible.

We also have the chance, right now, to beat other countries in the race
for the next wave of high-tech manufacturing jobs. My administration
has launched two hubs for high-tech manufacturing in Raleigh, North
Carolina, and Youngstown, Ohio, where we've connected businesses to
research universities that can help America lead the world in advanced
technologies. Tonight I'm announcing, we'll launch six more this year.
Bipartisan bills in both Houses could double the number of these hubs
and the jobs they create. So get those bills to my desk. Put more
Americans back to work.

Let's do more to help the entrepreneurs and small-business owners who
create most new jobs in America. Over the past 5 years, my
administration has made more loans to small-business owners than any
other. And when 98 percent of our exporters are small businesses, new
trade partnerships with Europe and Asia--the Asia-Pacific will help them
create more jobs. We need to work together on tools like bipartisan
trade promotion authority to protect our workers, protect our
environment, and open new markets to new goods stamped "Made in the
U.S.A."

Listen, China and Europe aren't standing on the sidelines, and neither
should we. We know that the nation that goes all-in on innovation today
will own the global economy tomorrow. This is an edge America cannot
surrender. Federally funded research helped lead to the ideas and
inventions behind Google and smartphones. And that's why Congress
should undo the damage done by last year's cuts to basic research so we
can unleash the next great American discovery. There are entire
industries to be built based on vaccines that stay ahead of drug-
resistant bacteria or paper-thin material that's stronger than steel.
And let's pass a patent reform bill that allows our businesses to stay
focused on innovation, not costly and needless litigation.

Now, one of the biggest factors in bringing more jobs back is our
commitment to American energy. The all-of-the-above energy strategy I
announced a few years ago is working, and today, America is closer to
energy independence than we have been in decades.

One of the reasons why is natural gas. If extracted safely, it's the
bridge fuel that can power our economy with less of the carbon
pollution that causes climate change. Businesses plan to invest almost
$100 billion in new factories that use natural gas. I'll cut redtape to
help States get those factories built and put folks to work, and this
Congress can help by putting people to work building fueling stations
that shift more cars and trucks from foreign oil to American natural
gas.

Meanwhile, my administration will keep working with the industry to
sustain production and jobs growth while strengthening protection of
our air, our water, our communities. And while we're at it, I'll use my
authority to protect more of our pristine Federal lands for future
generations.

Well, it's not just oil and natural gas production that's booming,
we're becoming a global leader in solar too. Every 4 minutes, another
American home or business goes solar, every panel pounded into place by
a worker whose job cannot be outsourced. Let's continue that progress
with a smarter tax policy that stops giving $4 billion a year to fossil
fuel industries that don't need it so we can invest more in fuels of
the future that do.

And even as we've increased energy production, we've partnered with
businesses, builders, and local communities to reduce the energy we
consume. When we rescued our automakers, for example, we worked with
them to set higher fuel efficiency standards for our cars. In the
coming months, I'll build on that success by setting new standards for
our trucks so we can keep driving down oil imports and what we pay at
the pump.

And taken together, our energy policy is creating jobs and leading to a
cleaner, safer planet. Over the past 8 years, the United States has
reduced our total carbon pollution more than any other nation on Earth.
But we have to act with more urgency, because a changing climate is
already harming Western communities struggling with drought and coastal
cities dealing with floods. That's why I directed my administration to
work with States, utilities, and others to set new standards on the
amount of carbon pollution our power plants are allowed to dump into
the air.

The shift to a cleaner energy economy won't happen overnight, and it
will require some tough choices along the way. But the debate is
settled. Climate change is a fact. And when our children's children
look us in the eye and ask if we did all we could to leave them a safer,
more stable world, with new sources of energy, I want us to be able to
say, yes, we did.

Finally, if we're serious about economic growth, it is time to heed the
call of business leaders, labor leaders, faith leaders, law enforcement
and fix our broken immigration system. Republicans and Democrats in the
Senate have acted, and I know that members of both parties in the House
want to do the same. Independent economists say immigration reform will
grow our economy and shrink our deficits by almost $1 trillion in the
next two decades. And for good reason: When people come here to fulfill
their dreams--to study, invent, contribute to our culture--they make our
country a more attractive place for businesses to locate and create
jobs for everybody. So let's get immigration reform done this year.
[Applause] Let's get it done. It's time.

The ideas I've outlined so far can speed up growth and create more jobs.
But in this rapidly changing economy, we have to make sure that every
American has the skills to fill those jobs. The good news is, we know
how to do it.

Two years ago, as the auto industry came roaring back, Andra Rush
opened up a manufacturing firm in Detroit. She knew that Ford needed
parts for the best selling truck in America, and she knew how to make
those parts. She just needed the workforce. So she dialed up what we
call an American Job Center, places where folks can walk in to get the
help or training they need to find a new job or a better job. She was
flooded with new workers. And today, Detroit Manufacturing Systems has
more than 700 employees. And what Andra and her employees experienced
is how it should be for every employer and every job seeker.

So tonight I've asked Vice President Biden to lead an across-the-board
reform of America's training programs to make sure they have one
mission: train Americans with the skills employers need and match them
to good jobs that need to be filled right now. That means more on-the-
job training and more apprenticeships that set a young worker on an
upward trajectory for life. It means connecting companies to community
colleges that can help design training to fill their specific needs.
And if Congress wants to help, you can concentrate funding on proven
programs that connect more ready-to-work Americans with ready-to-be-
filled jobs.

I'm also convinced we can help Americans return to the workforce faster
by reforming unemployment insurance so that it's more effective in
today's economy. But first, this Congress needs to restore the
unemployment insurance you just let expire for 1.6 million people.

Let me tell you why. Misty DeMars is a mother of two young boys. She'd
been steadily employed since she was a teenager, put herself through
college. She'd never collected unemployment benefits, but she'd been
paying taxes. In May, she and her husband used their life savings to
buy their first home. A week later, budget cuts claimed the job she
loved. Last month, when their unemployment insurance was cut off, she
sat down and wrote me a letter, the kind I get every day. "We are the
face of the unemployment crisis," she wrote. "I'm not dependent on the
government. Our country depends on people like us who build careers,
contribute to society, care about our neighbors. I'm confident that in
time, I will find a job, I will pay my taxes, and we will raise our
children in their own home in the community we love. Please give us
this chance."

Congress, give these hard-working, responsible Americans that chance.
Give them that chance. [Applause] Give them the chance. They need our
help right now. But more important, this country needs them in the game.
That's why I've been asking CEOs to give more long-term unemployed
workers a fair shot at new jobs, a new chance to support their families.
And in fact, this week, many will come to the White House to make that
commitment real. Tonight I ask every business leader in America to join
us and to do the same, because we are stronger when America fields a
full team.

Of course, it's not enough to train today's workforce. We also have to
prepare tomorrow's workforce, by guaranteeing every child access to a
world-class education. Estiven Rodriguez couldn't speak a word of
English when he moved to New York City at age 9. But last month, thanks
to the support of great teachers and an innovative tutoring program, he
led a march of his classmates through a crowd of cheering parents and
neighbors from their high school to the post office, where they mailed
off their college applications. And this son of a factory worker just
found out, he's going to college this fall.

Five years ago, we set out to change the odds for all our kids. We
worked with lenders to reform student loans, and today, more young
people are earning college degrees than ever before. Race to the Top,
with the help of Governors from both parties, has helped States raise
expectations and performance. Teachers and principals in schools from
Tennessee to Washington, DC, are making big strides in preparing
students with the skills for the new economy: problem solving, critical
thinking, science, technology, engineering, math.

Now, some of this change is hard. It requires everything from more
challenging curriculums and more demanding parents to better support
for teachers and new ways to measure how well our kids think, not how
well they can fill in a bubble on a test. But it is worth it, and it is
working. The problem is, we're still not reaching enough kids, and
we're not reaching them in time. And that has to change.

Research shows that one of the best investments we can make in a
child's life is high-quality early education. Last year, I asked this
Congress to help States make high-quality pre-K available to every 4-
year-old. And as a parent as well as a President, I repeat that request
tonight. But in the meantime, 30 States have raised pre-K funding on
their own. They know we can't wait. So just as we worked with States to
reform our schools, this year, we'll invest in new partnerships with
States and communities across the country in a Race to the Top for our
youngest children. And as Congress decides what it's going to do, I'm
going to pull together a coalition of elected officials, business
leaders, and philanthropists willing to help more kids access the high-
quality pre-K that they need. It is right for America. We need to get
this done.

Last year, I also pledged to connect 99 percent of our students to
high-speed broadband over the next 4 years. Tonight I can announce that
with the support of the FCC and companies like Apple, Microsoft, Sprint,
and Verizon, we've got a down payment to start connecting more than
15,000 schools and 20 million students over the next 2 years, without
adding a dime to the deficit.

We're working to redesign high schools and partner them with colleges
and employers that offer the real-world education and hands-on training
that can lead directly to a job and career. We're shaking up our system
of higher education to give parents more information and colleges more
incentive to offer better value so that no middle class kid is priced
out of a college education.

We're offering millions the opportunity to cap their monthly student
loan payments to 10 percent of their income, and I want to work with
Congress to see how we can help even more Americans who feel trapped by
student loan debt. And I'm reaching out to some of America's leading
foundations and corporations on a new initiative to help more young men
of color facing especially tough odds to stay on track and reach their
full potential.

The bottom line is, Michelle and I want every child to have the same
chance this country gave us. But we know our opportunity agenda won't
be complete, and too many young people entering the workforce today
will see the American Dream as an empty promise, unless we also do more
to make sure our economy honors the dignity of work and hard work pays
off for every single American.

Today, women make up about half our workforce, but they still make 77
cents for every dollar a man earns. That is wrong, and in 2014, it's an
embarrassment. Women deserve equal pay for equal work. She deserves to
have a baby without sacrificing her job. A mother deserves a day off to
care for a sick child or a sick parent without running into hardship.
And you know what, a father does too. It is time to do away with
workplace policies that belong in a "Mad Men" episode. [Laughter] This
year, let's all come together--Congress, the White House, businesses
from Wall Street to Main Street--to give every woman the opportunity she
deserves. Because I believe when women succeed, America succeeds.

Now, women hold a majority of lower wage jobs, but they're not the only
ones stifled by stagnant wages. Americans understand that some people
will earn more money than others, and we don't resent those who, by
virtue of their efforts, achieve incredible success. That's what
America is all about. But Americans overwhelmingly agree that no one
who works full-time should ever have to raise a family in poverty.

In the year since I asked this Congress to raise the minimum wage, five
States have passed laws to raise theirs. Many businesses have done it
on their own. Nick Chute is here today with his boss, John Soranno.
John's an owner of Punch Pizza in Minneapolis, and Nick helps make the
dough. [Laughter] Only now he makes more of it. [Laughter] John just
gave his employees a raise to 10 bucks an hour, and that's a decision
that has eased their financial stress and boosted their morale.

Tonight I ask more of America's business leaders to follow John's lead:
Do what you can to raise your employees' wages. It's good for the
economy. It's good for America. To every mayor, Governor, State
legislator in America, I say: You don't have to wait for Congress to
act; Americans will support you if you take this on.

And as a chief executive, I intend to lead by example. Profitable
corporations like Costco see higher wages as the smart way to boost
productivity and reduce turnover. We should too. In the coming weeks, I
will issue an Executive order requiring Federal contractors to pay
their federally funded employees a fair wage of at least 10 dollars and
10 cents an hour. Because if you cook our troops' meals or wash their
dishes, you should not have to live in poverty.

Of course, to reach millions more, Congress does need to get on board.
Today, the Federal minimum wage is worth about 20 percent less than it
was when Ronald Reagan first stood here. And Tom Harkin and George
Miller have a bill to fix that by lifting the minimum wage to 10
dollars and 10 cents. It's easy to remember: 10-10. This will help
families. It will give businesses customers with more money to spend.
It does not involve any new bureaucratic program. So join the rest of
the country. Say yes. Give America a raise. Give them a raise.

There are other steps we can take to help families make ends meet, and
few are more effective at reducing inequality and helping families pull
themselves up through hard work than the earned-income tax credit.
Right now it helps about half of all parents at some point. Think about
that: It helps about half of all parents in America at some point in
their lives. But I agree with Republicans like Senator Rubio that it
doesn't do enough for single workers who don't have kids. So let's work
together to strengthen the credit, reward work, help more Americans get
ahead.

Let's do more to help Americans save for retirement. Today, most
workers don't have a pension. A Social Security check often isn't
enough on its own. And while the stock market has doubled over the last
5 years, that doesn't help folks who don't have 401(k)s. That's why,
tomorrow, I will direct the Treasury to create a new way for working
Americans to start their own retirement savings: MyI--MyRA.

It's a new savings bond that encourages folks to build a nest egg. MyRA
guarantees a decent return with no risk of losing what you put in. And
if this Congress wants to help, work with me to fix an upside-down Tax
Code that gives big tax breaks to help the wealthy save, but does
little or nothing for middle class Americans. Offer every American
access to an automatic IRA on the job so they can save at work just
like everybody in this Chamber can.

And since the most important investment many families make is their
home, send me legislation that protects taxpayers from footing the bill
for a housing crisis ever again and keeps the dream of homeownership
alive for future generations.

One last point on financial security: For decades, few things exposed
hard-working families to economic hardship more than a broken health
care system. And in case you haven't heard, we're in the process of
fixing that. Now, a preexisting condition used to mean that someone
like Amanda Shelley, a physician's assistant and single mom from
Arizona, couldn't get health insurance. But on January 1, she got
covered. On January 3, she felt a sharp pain. On January 6, she had
emergency surgery. Just one week earlier, Amanda said, and that surgery
would have meant bankruptcy.

That's what health insurance reform is all about: the peace of mind
that if misfortune strikes, you don't have to lose everything. Already,
because of the Affordable Care Act, more than 3 million Americans under
age 26 have gained coverage under their parent's plan. More than 9
million Americans have signed up for private health insurance or
Medicaid coverage. Nine million.

And here's another number: zero. Because of this law, no American--none,
zero--can ever again be dropped or denied coverage for a preexisting
condition like asthma or back pain or cancer. No woman can ever be
charged more just because she's a woman. And we did all this while
adding years to Medicare's finances, keeping Medicare premiums flat,
and lowering prescription costs for millions of seniors.

Now, I do not expect to convince my Republican friends on the merits of
this law. [Laughter] But I know that the American people are not
interested in refighting old battles. So again, if you have specific
plans to cut costs, cover more people, increase choice, tell America
what you'd do differently. Let's see if the numbers add up. But let's
not have another 40-something votes to repeal a law that's already
helping millions of Americans like Amanda. The first 40 were plenty.
[Laughter]

We all owe it to the American people to say what we're for, not just
what we're against. And if you want to know the real impact this law is
having, just talk to Governor Steve Beshear of Kentucky, who's here
tonight. Now, Kentucky is not the most liberal part of the country.
That's not where I got my highest vote totals. [Laughter] But he's like
a man possessed when it comes to covering his Commonwealth's families.
They're our neighbors and our friends, he said: "They're people we shop
and go to church with, farmers out on the tractor, grocery clerks.
They're people who go to work every morning praying they don't get sick.
No one deserves to live that way."

Steve's right. That's why tonight I ask every American who knows
someone without health insurance to help them get covered by March 31.
[Applause] Help them get covered. Moms, get on your kids to sign up.
Kids, call your mom and walk her through the application. It will give
her some peace of mind, and plus, she'll appreciate hearing from you.
[Laughter]

After all, that's the spirit that has always moved this Nation forward.
It's the spirit of citizenship, the recognition that through hard work
and responsibility, we can pursue our individual dreams, but still come
together as one American family to make sure the next generation can
pursue its dreams as well.

Citizenship means standing up for everyone's right to vote. Last year,
part of the Voting Rights Act was weakened, but conservative
Republicans and liberal Democrats are working together to strengthen it.
And the bipartisan Commission I appointed, chaired by my campaign
lawyer and Governor Romney's campaign lawyer, came together and have
offered reforms so that no one has to wait more than a half hour to
vote. Let's support these efforts. It should be the power of our vote,
not the size of our bank accounts, that drives our democracy.

Citizenship means standing up for the lives that gun violence steals
from us each day. I've seen the courage of parents, students, pastors,
police officers all over this country who say, "We are not afraid." And
I intend to keep trying, with or without Congress, to help stop more
tragedies from visiting innocent Americans in our movie theaters, in
our shopping malls, or schools like Sandy Hook.

Citizenship demands a sense of common purpose, participation in the
hard work of self-government, an obligation to serve our communities.
And I know this Chamber agrees that few Americans give more to their
country than our diplomats and the men and women of the United States
Armed Forces. Thank you. Tonight, because of the extraordinary troops
and civilians who risk and lay down their lives to keep us free, the
United States is more secure. When I took office, nearly 180,000
Americans were serving in Iraq and Afghanistan. Today, all our troops
are out of Iraq. More than 60,000 of our troops have already come home
from Afghanistan. With Afghan forces now in the lead for their own
security, our troops have moved to a support role. Together with our
allies, we will complete our mission there by the end of this year, and
America's longest war will finally be over.

After 2014, we will support a unified Afghanistan as it takes
responsibility for its own future. If the Afghan Government signs a
security agreement that we have negotiated, a small force of Americans
could remain in Afghanistan with NATO allies to carry out two narrow
missions: training and assisting Afghan forces and counterterrorism
operations to pursue any remnants of Al Qaida. For while our
relationship with Afghanistan will change, one thing will not: our
resolve that terrorists do not launch attacks against our country.

The fact is, that danger remains. While we've put Al Qaida's core
leadership on a path to defeat, the threat has evolved as Al Qaida
affiliates and other extremists take root in different parts of the
world. In Yemen, Somalia, Iraq, Mali, we have to keep working with
partners to disrupt and disable those networks. In Syria, we'll support
the opposition that rejects the agenda of terrorist networks. Here at
home, we'll keep strengthening our defenses and combat new threats like
cyber attacks. And as we reform our defense budget, we will have to
keep faith with our men and women in uniform and invest in the
capabilities they need to succeed in future missions.

We have to remain vigilant. But I strongly believe our leadership and
our security cannot depend on our outstanding military alone. As
Commander in Chief, I have used force when needed to protect the
American people, and I will never hesitate to do so as long as I hold
this office. But I will not send our troops into harm's way unless it
is truly necessary, nor will I allow our sons and daughters to be mired
in open-ended conflicts. We must fight the battles that need to be
fought, not those that terrorists prefer from us: large-scale
deployments that drain our strength and may ultimately feed extremism.

So even as we actively and aggressively pursue terrorist networks
through more targeted efforts and by building the capacity of our
foreign partners, America must move off a permanent war footing. That's
why I've imposed prudent limits on the use of drones. For we will not
be safer if people abroad believe we strike within their countries
without regard for the consequence.

That's why, working with this Congress, I will reform our surveillance
programs, because the vital work of our intelligence community depends
on public confidence, here and abroad, that privacy of ordinary people
is not being violated.

And with the Afghan war ending, this needs to be the year Congress
lifts the remaining restrictions on detainee transfers and we close the
prison at Guantanamo Bay. Because we counter terrorism not just through
intelligence and military actions, but by remaining true to our
constitutional ideals and setting an example for the rest of the world.

You see, in a world of complex threats, our security, our leadership,
depends on all elements of our power, including strong and principled
diplomacy. American diplomacy has rallied more than 50 countries to
prevent nuclear materials from falling into the wrong hands and allowed
us to reduce our own reliance on cold war stockpiles. American
diplomacy, backed by the threat of force, is why Syria's chemical
weapons are being eliminated.

And we will continue to work with the international community to usher
in the future the Syrian people deserve, a future free of dictatorship,
terror, and fear. As we speak, American diplomacy is supporting
Israelis and Palestinians as they engage in the difficult but necessary
talks to end the conflict there, to achieve dignity and an independent
state for Palestinians and lasting peace and security for the State of
Israel, a Jewish state that knows America will always be at their side.

And it is American diplomacy, backed by pressure, that has halted the
progress of Iran's nuclear program and rolled back parts of that
program for the very first time in a decade. As we gather here tonight,
Iran has begun to eliminate its stockpile of higher levels of enriched
