uranium. It's not installing advanced centrifuges. Unprecedented
inspections help the world verify every day that Iran is not building a
bomb. And with our allies and partners, we're engaged in negotiations
to see if we can peacefully achieve a goal we all share: preventing
Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.

These negotiations will be difficult. They may not succeed. We are
clear eyed about Iran's support for terrorist organizations like
Hizballah, which threatens our allies. And we're clear about the
mistrust between our nations, mistrust that cannot be wished away. But
these negotiations don't rely on trust. Any long-term deal we agree to
must be based on verifiable action that convinces us and the
international community that Iran is not building a nuclear bomb. If
John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan could negotiate with the Soviet Union,
then surely a strong and confident America can negotiate with less
powerful adversaries today.

The sanctions that we put in place helped make this opportunity
possible. But let me be clear: If this Congress sends me a new
sanctions bill now that threatens to derail these talks, I will veto it.
For the sake of our national security, we must give diplomacy a chance
to succeed. If Iran's leaders do not seize this opportunity, then I
will be the first to call for more sanctions and stand ready to
exercise all options to make sure Iran does not build a nuclear weapon.
But if Iran's leaders do seize the chance--and we'll know soon enough--
then Iran could take an important step to rejoin the community of
nations, and we will have resolved one of the leading security
challenges of our time without the risks of war.

Now, finally, let's remember that our leadership is defined not just by
our defense against threats, but by the enormous opportunities to do
good and promote understanding around the globe: to forge greater
cooperation, to expand new markets, to free people from fear and want.
And no one is better positioned to take advantage of those
opportunities than America.

Our alliance with Europe remains the strongest the world has ever known.
From Tunisia to Burma, we're supporting those who are willing to do the
hard work of building democracy. In Ukraine, we stand for the principle
that all people have the right to express themselves freely and
peacefully and to have a say in their country's future. Across Africa,
we're bringing together businesses and governments to double access to
electricity and help end extreme poverty. In the Americas, we're
building new ties of commerce, but we're also expanding cultural and
educational exchanges among young people. And we will continue to focus
on the Asia-Pacific, where we support our allies, shape a future of
greater security and prosperity, and extend a hand to those devastated
by disaster, as we did in the Philippines, when our Marines and
civilians rushed to aid those battered by a typhoon, and who were
greeted with words like, "We will never forget your kindness" and "God
bless America."

We do these things because they help promote our long-term security,
and we do them because we believe in the inherent dignity and equality
of every human being, regardless of race or religion, creed or sexual
orientation. And next week, the world will see one expression of that
commitment, when Team U.S.A. marches the red, white, and blue into the
Olympic Stadium and brings home the gold. [Laughter]

Audience members. U.S.A.! U.S.A.! U.S.A.!

The President. My fellow Americans, no other country in the world does
what we do. On every issue, the world turns to us, not simply because
of the size of our economy or our military might, but because of the
ideals we stand for and the burdens we bear to advance them. No one
knows this better than those who serve in uniform.

As this time of war draws to a close, a new generation of heroes
returns to civilian life. We'll keep slashing that backlog so our
veterans receive the benefits they've earned and our wounded warriors
receive the health care--including the mental health care--that they need.
We'll keep working to help all our veterans translate their skills and
leadership into jobs here at home. And we will all continue to join
forces to honor and support our remarkable military families.

Let me tell you about one of those families I've come to know. I first
met Cory Remsburg, a proud Army Ranger, at Omaha Beach on the 65th
anniversary of D-day. Along with some of his fellow Rangers, he walked
me through the program and the ceremony. He was a strong, impressive
young man, had an easy manner, he was sharp as a tack. And we joked
around and took pictures, and I told him to stay in touch.

A few months later, on his 10th deployment, Cory was nearly killed by a
massive roadside bomb in Afghanistan. His comrades found him in a canal,
face down, underwater, shrapnel in his brain. For months, he lay in a
coma. And the next time I met him, in the hospital, he couldn't speak,
could barely move. Over the years, he's endured dozens of surgeries and
procedures, hours of grueling rehab every day.

Even now, Cory is still blind in one eye, still struggles on his left
side. But slowly, steadily, with the support of caregivers like his dad
Craig and the community around him, Cory has grown stronger. And day by
day, he's learned to speak again and stand again and walk again. And
he's working toward the day when he can serve his country again. "My
recovery has not been easy," he says. "Nothing in life that's worth
anything is easy." Cory is here tonight. And like the Army he loves,
like the America he serves, Sergeant First Class Cory Remsburg never
gives up, and he does not quit. Cory.

My fellow Americans, men and women like Cory remind us that America has
never come easy. Our freedom, our democracy, has never been easy.
Sometimes, we stumble, we make mistakes; we get frustrated or
discouraged. But for more than 200 years, we have put those things
aside and placed our collective shoulder to the wheel of progress: to
create and build and expand the possibilities of individual achievement,
to free other nations from tyranny and fear, to promote justice and
fairness and equality under the law so that the words set to paper by
our Founders are made real for every citizen. The America we want for
our kids--a rising America where honest work is plentiful and
communities are strong, where prosperity is widely shared and
opportunity for all lets us go as far as our dreams and toil will take
us--none of it is easy. But if we work together--if we summon what is
best in us, the way Cory summoned what is best in him--with our feet
planted firmly in today, but our eyes cast toward tomorrow, I know it
is within our reach. Believe it.

God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.


***


Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
Barack Obama
January 20, 2015


The President. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, my
fellow Americans: We are 15 years into this new century. Fifteen years
that dawned with terror touching our shores, that unfolded with a new
generation fighting two long and costly wars, that saw a vicious
recession spread across our Nation and the world. It has been and still
is a hard time for many.

But tonight we turn the page. Tonight, after a breakthrough year for
America, our economy is growing and creating jobs at the fastest pace
since 1999. Our unemployment rate is now lower than it was before the
financial crisis. More of our kids are graduating than ever before.
More of our people are insured than ever before. And we are as free
from the grip of foreign oil as we've been in almost 30 years.

Tonight, for the first time since 9/11, our combat mission in
Afghanistan is over. Six years ago, nearly 180,000 American troops
served in Iraq and Afghanistan. Today, fewer than 15,000 remain. And we
salute the courage and sacrifice of every man and woman in this 9/11
generation who has served to keep us safe. We are humbled and grateful
for your service.

America, for all that we have endured, for all the grit and hard work
required to come back, for all the tasks that lie ahead, know this: The
shadow of crisis has passed, and the State of the Union is strong.

At this moment--with a growing economy, shrinking deficits, bustling
industry, booming energy production--we have risen from recession freer
to write our own future than any other nation on Earth. It's now up to
us to choose who we want to be over the next 15 years and for decades
to come.

Will we accept an economy where only a few of us do spectacularly well?
Or will we commit ourselves to an economy that generates rising incomes
and chances for everyone who makes the effort?

Will we approach the world fearful and reactive, dragged into costly
conflicts that strain our military and set back our standing? Or will
we lead wisely, using all elements of our power to defeat new threats
and protect our planet?

Will we allow ourselves to be sorted into factions and turned against
one another? Or will we recapture the sense of common purpose that has
always propelled America forward?

In 2 weeks, I will send this Congress a budget filled with ideas that
are practical, not partisan. And in the months ahead, I'll crisscross
the country making a case for those ideas. So tonight I want to focus
less on a checklist of proposals and focus more on the values at stake
in the choices before us.

It begins with our economy. Seven years ago, Rebekah and Ben Erler of
Minneapolis were newlyweds. [Laughter] She waited tables. He worked
construction. Their first child Jack was on the way. They were young
and in love in America. And it doesn't get much better than that. "If
only we had known," Rebekah wrote to me last spring, "what was about to
happen to the housing and construction market." As the crisis worsened,
Ben's business dried up, so he took what jobs he could find, even if
they kept him on the road for long stretches of time. Rebekah took out
student loans and enrolled in community college and retrained for a new
career. They sacrificed for each other. And slowly, it paid off. They
bought their first home. They had a second son Henry. Rebekah got a
better job and then a raise. Ben is back in construction and home for
dinner every night.

"It is amazing," Rebekah wrote, "what you can bounce back from when you
have to. . . . We are a strong, tight-knit family who has made it
through some very, very hard times." We are a strong, tight-knit family
who has made it through some very, very hard times.

America, Rebekah and Ben's story is our story. They represent the
millions who have worked hard and scrimped and sacrificed and retooled.
You are the reason that I ran for this office. You are the people I was
thinking of 6 years ago today, in the darkest months of the crisis,
when I stood on the steps of this Capitol and promised we would rebuild
our economy on a new foundation. And it has been your resilience, your
effort that has made it possible for our country to emerge stronger.

We believed we could reverse the tide of outsourcing and draw new jobs
to our shores. And over the past 5 years, our businesses have created
more than 11 million new jobs.

We believed we could reduce our dependence on foreign oil and protect
our planet. And today, America is number one in oil and gas. America is
number one in wind power. Every 3 weeks, we bring online as much solar
power as we did in all of 2008. And thanks to lower gas prices and
higher fuel standards, the typical family this year should save about
$750 at the pump.

We believed we could prepare our kids for a more competitive world. And
today, our younger students have earned the highest math and reading
scores on record. Our high school graduation rate has hit an alltime
high. More Americans finish college than ever before.

We believed that sensible regulations could prevent another crisis,
shield families from ruin, and encourage fair competition. Today, we
have new tools to stop taxpayer-funded bailouts and a new consumer
watchdog to protect us from predatory lending and abusive credit card
practices. And in the past year alone, about 10 million uninsured
Americans finally gained the security of health coverage.

At every step, we were told our goals were misguided or too ambitious,
that we would crush jobs and explode deficits. Instead, we've seen the
fastest economic growth in over a decade, our deficits cut by two-
thirds, a stock market that has doubled, and health care inflation at
its lowest rate in 50 years. This is good news, people. [Laughter]

So the verdict is clear. Middle class economics works. Expanding
opportunity works. And these policies will continue to work as long as
politics don't get in the way. We can't slow down businesses or put our
economy at risk with Government shutdowns or fiscal showdowns. We can't
put the security of families at risk by taking away their health
insurance or unraveling the new rules on Wall Street or refighting past
battles on immigration when we've got to fix a broken system. And if a
bill comes to my desk that tries to do any of these things, I will veto
it. It will have earned my veto.

Today, thanks to a growing economy, the recovery is touching more and
more lives. Wages are finally starting to rise again. We know that more
small-business owners plan to raise their employees' pay than at any
time since 2007. But here's the thing: Those of us here tonight, we
need to set our sights higher than just making sure Government doesn't
screw things up--[laughter]--that Government doesn't halt the progress
we're making. We need to do more than just do no harm. Tonight,
together, let's do more to restore the link between hard work and
growing opportunity for every American.

Because families like Rebekah's still need our help. She and Ben are
working as hard as ever, but they've had to forego vacations and a new
car so that they can pay off student loans and save for retirement.
Friday night pizza, that's a big splurge. Basic childcare for Jack and
Henry costs more than their mortgage and almost as much as a year at
the University of Minnesota. Like millions of hard-working Americans,
Rebekah isn't asking for a handout, but she is asking that we look for
more ways to help families get ahead.

And in fact, at every moment of economic change throughout our history,
this country has taken bold action to adapt to new circumstances and to
make sure everyone gets a fair shot. We set up worker protections,
Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid to protect ourselves from the
harshest adversity. We gave our citizens schools and colleges,
infrastructure and the Internet, tools they needed to go as far as
their efforts and their dreams will take them.

That's what middle class economics is: the idea that this country does
best when everyone gets their fair shot, everyone does their fair share,
everyone plays by the same set of rules. We don't just want everyone to
share in America's success, we want everyone to contribute to our
success.

So what does middle class economics require in our time? First, middle
class economics means helping working families feel more secure in a
world of constant change. That means helping folks afford childcare,
college, health care, a home, retirement. And my budget will address
each of these issues, lowering the taxes of working families and
putting thousands of dollars back into their pockets each year.

Here's one example. During World War II, when men like my grandfather
went off to war, having women like my grandmother in the workforce was
a national security priority, so this country provided universal
childcare. In today's economy, when having both parents in the
workforce is an economic necessity for many families, we need
affordable, high-quality childcare more than ever.

It's not a nice-to-have, it's a must-have. So it's time we stop
treating childcare as a side issue, or as a women's issue, and treat it
like the national economic priority that it is for all of us. And
that's why my plan will make quality childcare more available and more
affordable for every middle class and low-income family with young
children in America, by creating more slots and a new tax cut of up to
$3,000 per child, per year.

Here's another example. Today, we are the only advanced country on
Earth that doesn't guarantee paid sick leave or paid maternity leave to
our workers. Forty-three million workers have no paid sick leave--43
million. Think about that. And that forces too many parents to make the
gut-wrenching choice between a paycheck and a sick kid at home. So I'll
be taking new action to help States adopt paid leave laws of their own.
And since paid sick leave won where it was on the ballot last November,
let's put it to a vote right here in Washington. Send me a bill that
gives every worker in America the opportunity to earn 7 days of paid
sick leave. It's the right thing to do. [Applause] It's the right thing
to do.

Of course, nothing helps families make ends meet like higher wages.
That's why this Congress still needs to pass a law that makes sure a
woman is paid the same as a man for doing the same work. I mean, it's
2015. [Laughter] It's time. We still need to make sure employees get
the overtime they've earned. And to everyone in this Congress who still
refuses to raise the minimum wage, I say this: If you truly believe you
could work full time and support a family on less than $15,000 a year,
try it. If not, vote to give millions of the hardest working people in
America a raise.

Now, these ideas won't make everybody rich, won't relieve every
hardship. That's not the job of government. To give working families a
fair shot, we still need more employers to see beyond next quarter's
earnings and recognize that investing in their workforce is in their
company's long-term interest. We still need laws that strengthen rather
than weaken unions, and give American workers a voice.

But you know, things like childcare and sick leave and equal pay,
things like lower mortgage premiums and a higher minimum wage--these
ideas will make a meaningful difference in the lives of millions of
families. That's a fact. And that's what all of us, Republicans and
Democrats alike, were sent here to do.

Now, second, to make sure folks keep earning higher wages down the road,
we have to do more to help Americans upgrade their skills. America
thrived in the 20th century because we made high school free, sent a
generation of GIs to college, trained the best workforce in the world.
We were ahead of the curve. But other countries caught on. And in a
21st-century economy that rewards knowledge like never before, we need
to up our game. We need to do more.

By the end of this decade, two in three job openings will require some
higher education--two in three. And yet we still live in a country where
too many bright, striving Americans are priced out of the education
they need. It's not fair to them, and it's sure not smart for our
future. And that's why I'm sending this Congress a bold new plan to
lower the cost of community college to zero.

Keep in mind, 40 percent of our college students choose community
college. Some are young and starting out. Some are older and looking
for a better job. Some are veterans and single parents trying to
transition back into the job market. Whoever you are, this plan is your
chance to graduate ready for the new economy without a load of debt.
Understand, you've got to earn it. You've got to keep your grades up
and graduate on time.

Tennessee, a State with Republican leadership, and Chicago, a city with
Democratic leadership, are showing that free community college is
possible. I want to spread that idea all across America so that 2 years
of college becomes as free and universal in America as high school is
today. Let's stay ahead of the curve. And I want to work with this
Congress to make sure those already burdened with student loans can
reduce their monthly payments so that student debt doesn't derail
anyone's dreams.

Thanks to Vice President Biden's great work to update our job training
system, we're connecting community colleges with local employers to
train workers to fill high-paying jobs like coding and nursing and
robotics. Tonight I'm also asking more businesses to follow the lead of
companies like CVS and UPS and offer more educational benefits and paid
apprenticeships, opportunities that give workers the chance to earn
higher paying jobs even if they don't have a higher education.

And as a new generation of veterans comes home, we owe them every
opportunity to live the American Dream they helped defend. Already,
we've made strides towards ensuring that every veteran has access to
the highest quality care. We're slashing the backlog that had too many
veterans waiting years to get the benefits they need. And we're making
it easier for vets to translate their training and experience into
civilian jobs. And Joining Forces, the national campaign launched by
Michelle and Jill Biden--[applause]--thank you, Michelle; thank you,
Jill--has helped nearly 700,000 veterans and military spouses get a new
job. So to every CEO in America, let me repeat: If you want somebody
who's going to get the job done and done right, hire a veteran.

Finally, as we better train our workers, we need the new economy to
keep churning out high-wage jobs for our workers to fill. Since 2010,
America has put more people back to work than Europe, Japan, and all
advanced economies combined.

Our manufacturers have added almost 800,000 new jobs. Some of our
bedrock sectors, like our auto industry, are booming. But there are
also millions of Americans who work in jobs that didn't even exist 10
or 20 years ago, jobs at companies like Google and eBay and Tesla.

So no one knows for certain which industries will generate the jobs of
the future. But we do know we want them here in America. We know that.
And that's why the third part of middle class economics is all about
building the most competitive economy anywhere, the place where
businesses want to locate and hire.

Twenty-first century businesses need 21st-century infrastructure:
modern ports and stronger bridges, faster trains and the fastest
Internet. Democrats and Republicans used to agree on this. So let's set
our sights higher than a single oil pipeline. Let's pass a bipartisan
infrastructure plan that could create more than 30 times as many jobs
per year and make this country stronger for decades to come. Let's do
it. Let's get it done. [Applause] Let's get it done.

Twenty-first century businesses, including small businesses, need to
sell more American products overseas. Today, our businesses export more
than ever, and exporters tend to pay their workers higher wages. But as
we speak, China wants to write the rules for the world's fastest
growing region. That would put our workers and our businesses at a
disadvantage. Why would we let that happen? We should write those rules.
We should level the playing field. And that's why I'm asking both
parties to give me trade promotion authority to protect American
workers, with strong new trade deals from Asia to Europe that aren't
just free, but are also fair. It's the right thing to do.

Look, I'm the first one to admit that past trade deals haven't always
lived up to the hype, and that's why we've gone after countries that
break the rules at our expense. But 95 percent of the world's customers
live outside our borders. We can't close ourselves off from those
opportunities. More than half of manufacturing executives have said
they're actively looking to bring jobs back from China. So let's give
them one more reason to get it done.

Twenty-first century businesses will rely on American science and
technology, research and development. I want the country that
eliminated polio and mapped the human genome to lead a new era of
medicine, one that delivers the right treatment at the right time.

In some patients with cystic fibrosis, this approach has reversed a
disease once thought unstoppable. So tonight I'm launching a new
precision medicine initiative to bring us closer to curing diseases
like cancer and diabetes and to give all of us access to the
personalized information we need to keep ourselves and our families
healthier. We can do this.

I intend to protect a free and open Internet, extend its reach to every
classroom and every community and help folks build the fastest networks
so that the next generation of digital innovators and entrepreneurs
have the platform to keep reshaping our world. I want Americans to win
the race for the kinds of discoveries that unleash new jobs: converting
sunlight into liquid fuel; creating revolutionary prosthetics so that a
veteran who gave his arms for his country can play catch with his kids
again; pushing out into the solar system not just to visit, but to stay.
Last month, we launched a new spacecraft as part of a reenergized space
program that will send American astronauts to Mars. And in 2 months, to
prepare us for those missions, Scott Kelly will begin a year-long stay
in space. So good luck, Captain. Make sure to Instagram it. We're proud
of you.

Now, the truth is, when it comes to issues like infrastructure and
basic research, I know there's bipartisan support in this Chamber.
Members of both parties have told me so. Where we too often run onto
the rocks is how to pay for these investments. As Americans, we don't
mind paying our fair share of taxes as long as everybody else does too.
But for far too long, lobbyists have rigged the Tax Code with loopholes
that let some corporations pay nothing while others pay full freight.
They've riddled it with giveaways that the super-rich don't need, while
denying a break to middle class families who do.

This year, we have an opportunity to change that. Let's close loopholes
so we stop rewarding companies that keep profits abroad and reward
those that invest here in America. Let's use those savings to rebuild
our infrastructure and to make it more attractive for companies to
bring jobs home. Let's simplify the system and let a small-business
owner file based on her actual bank statement, instead of the number of
accountants she can afford. And let's close the loopholes that lead to
inequality by allowing the top 1 percent to avoid paying taxes on their
accumulated wealth. We can use that money to help more families pay for
childcare and send their kids to college. We need a Tax Code that truly
helps working Americans trying to get a leg up in the new economy, and
we can achieve that together. [Applause] We can achieve it together.

Helping hard-working families make ends meet, giving them the tools
they need for good-paying jobs in this new economy, maintaining the
conditions of growth and competitiveness--this is where America needs to
go. I believe it's where the American people want to go. It will make
our economy stronger a year from now, 15 years from now, and deep into
the century ahead.

Of course, if there's one thing this new century has taught us, it's
that we cannot separate our work here at home from challenges beyond
our shores. My first duty as Commander in Chief is to defend the United
States of America. In doing so, the question is not whether America
leads in the world, but how. When we make rash decisions, reacting to
the headlines instead of using our heads, when the first response to a
challenge is to send in our military, then we risk getting drawn into
unnecessary conflicts and neglect the broader strategy we need for a
safer, more prosperous world. That's what our enemies want us to do.

I believe in a smarter kind of American leadership. We lead best when
we combine military power with strong diplomacy, when we leverage our
power with coalition building, when we don't let our fears blind us to
the opportunities that this new century presents. That's exactly what
we're doing right now. And around the globe, it is making a difference.

